
2 State of the Art
Document conversion is a well-established field with numerous solutions already available on the market. These solutions can be categorized along several key dimensions, including open vs. closed source, permissive vs. restrictive licensing, Web APIs vs. local code deployment, susceptibility to hallucinations, conversion quality, time-to-solution, and compute resource requirements.

The most popular conversion tools today leverage vision-language models (VLMs), which process page images to text and markup directly. Among proprietary solutions, prominent examples include GPT-4o (OpenAI), Claude (Anthropic), and Gemini (Google). In the open-source domain, LLaVA-based models, such as LLaVA-next, are noteworthy. However, all generative AI-based models face two significant challenges. First, they are prone to hallucinations, i.e., their output may contain false information which is not present in the source document — a critical issue when faithful transcription of document content is required. Second, these models demand substantial computational resources, making the conversion process expensive. Consequently, VLM-based tools are typically offered as SaaS, with compute-intensive operations performed remotely in the cloud.

A second category of solutions prioritizes on-premises deployment, either as Web APIs or as libraries. Examples include Adobe Acrobat, Grobid, Marker, MinerU, Unstructured, and others. These solutions often rely on multiple specialized models, such as OCR, layout analysis, and table recognition models. Docling falls into this category, leveraging modular, task-specific models which recover document structures and features only. All text content is taken from the programmatic PDF or transcribed through OCR methods. This design ensures faithful conversion, without the risk of generating false content. However, it necessitates maintaining a diverse set of models for different document components, such as formulas or figures.

Within this category, Docling distinguishes itself through its permissive MIT license, allowing organizations to integrate Docling into their solutions without incurring licensing fees or adopting restrictive licenses (e.g., GPL). Additionally, Docling offers highly accurate, resource-efficient, and fast models, making it well-suited for integration with many standard frameworks.

In summary, Docling stands out as a cost-effective, accurate and transparent open-source library with a permissive license, offering a reliable and flexible solution for document conversion.

3 Design and Architecture
Docling v2 introduces a unified document representation,
DoclingDocument, as a Pydantic data model that can express various common document features, such as:
• Text, Tables, Pictures, Captions, Lists, and more.
• Document hierarchy with sections and groups.
• Disambiguation between main body and headers, footers
(furniture).
• Layout information (i.e., bounding boxes) for all items,
if available.
• Provenance information (i.e., page numbers, document
origin).
With this data model, Docling enables representing document content in a unified manner, i.e., regardless of the
source document format.
Besides specifying the data model, the
DoclingDocument class defines APIs encompassing document construction, inspection, and export. Using
the respective methods, users can incrementally build a
DoclingDocument, traverse its contents in reading
order, or export to commonly used formats. Docling
supports lossless serialization to (and deserialization from)
JSON, and lossy export formats such as Markdown and
HTML, which, unlike JSON, cannot retain all available
meta information.
A DoclingDocument can additionally be passed to a
chunker class, an abstraction that returns a stream of chunks,
each of which captures some part of the document as a string
accompanied by respective metadata. To enable both flexibility for downstream applications and out-of-the-box utility, Docling defines a chunker class hierarchy, providing a
base type as well as specific subclasses. By using the base
chunker type, downstream applications can leverage popular
frameworks like LangChain or LlamaIndex, which provide
a high degree of flexibility in the chunking approach. Users
can therefore plug in any built-in, self-defined, or third-party

3.1 Docling Document
Docling v2 introduces a unified document representation, DoclingDocument, as a Pydantic data model that can express various common document features, such as:

• Text, Tables, Pictures, Captions, Lists, and more.
• Document hierarchy with sections and groups.
• Disambiguation between main body and headers, footers (furniture).
• Layout information (i.e., bounding boxes) for all items, if available.
• Provenance information (i.e., page numbers, document origin).

With this data model, Docling enables representing document content in a unified manner, i.e., regardless of the
source document format.
Besides specifying the data model, the
DoclingDocument class defines APIs encompassing document construction, inspection, and export. Using
the respective methods, users can incrementally build a
DoclingDocument, traverse its contents in reading
order, or export to commonly used formats. Docling
supports lossless serialization to (and deserialization from)
JSON, and lossy export formats such as Markdown and
HTML, which, unlike JSON, cannot retain all available
meta information.
A DoclingDocument can additionally be passed to a
chunker class, an abstraction that returns a stream of chunks,
each of which captures some part of the document as a string
accompanied by respective metadata. To enable both flexibility for downstream applications and out-of-the-box utility, Docling defines a chunker class hierarchy, providing a
base type as well as specific subclasses. By using the base
chunker type, downstream applications can leverage popular
frameworks like LangChain or LlamaIndex, which provide
a high degree of flexibility in the chunking approach. Users
can therefore plug in any built-in, self-defined, or third-party
chunker implementation.


3.2 Parser Backends
Document formats can be broadly categorized into two
types:
1. Low-level formats, like PDF files or scanned images.
These formats primarily encode the visual representation
of the document, containing instructions for rendering
text cells and lines or defining image pixels. Most semantics of the represented content are typically lost and need
to be recovered through specialized AI methods, such as
OCR, layout analysis, or table structure recognition.
2. Markup-based formats, including MS Office, HTML,
Markdown, and others. These formats preserve the semantics of the content (e.g., sections, lists, tables, and
figures) and are comparatively inexpensive to parse.
Docling implements several parser backends to read and
interpret different formats and it routes their output to a fitting processing pipeline. For PDFs Docling provides backends which: a) retrieve all text content and their geometric properties, b) render the visual representation of each
page as it would appear in a PDF viewer. For markup-based
formats, the respective backends carry the responsibility of
creating a DoclingDocument representation directly. For
some formats, such as PowerPoint slides, element locations
and page provenance are available, whereas in other formats
(for example, MS Word or HTML), this information is unknown unless rendered in a Word viewer or a browser. The
DoclingDocument data model handles both cases.
PDF Backends While several open-source PDF parsing
Python libraries are available, in practice we ran into various limitations, among which are restrictive licensing (e.g.,
pymupdf (pym 2024)), poor speed, or unrecoverable quality issues, such as merged text cells across far-apart text tokens or table columns (pypdfium, PyPDF) (PyPDFium Team
2024; pypdf Maintainers 2024).
We therefore developed a custom-built PDF parser, which
is based on the low-level library qpdf (Berkenbilt 2024). Our
PDF parser is made available in a separate package named
docling-parse and acts as the default PDF backend in Docling. As an alternative, we provide a PDF backend relying
on pypdfium (PyPDFium Team 2024).
Other Backends Markup-based formats like HTML,
Markdown, or Microsoft Office (Word, PowerPoint, Excel) as well as plain formats like AsciiDoc can be transformed directly to a DoclingDocument representation
with the help of several third-party format parsing libraries.
For HTML documents we utilize BeautifulSoup (Richardson 2004–2024), for Markdown we use the Marko library (Ming 2019–2024), and for Office XML-based formats (Word, PowerPoint, Excel) we implement custom extensions on top of the python-docx (Canny and contributors
2013–2024a), python-pptx (Canny and contributors 2013–
2024b), and openpyxl (Eric Gazoni 2010–2024) libraries, respectively. During parsing, we identify and extract common
document elements (e.g., title, headings, paragraphs, tables,
lists, figures, and code) and reflect the correct hierarchy level
if possible

3.3 Pipelines
Pipelines in Docling serve as an orchestration layer which
iterates through documents, gathers the extracted data from
a parser backend, and applies a chain of models to: a) build
up the DoclingDocument representation and b) enrich
this representation further (e.g., classify images).
Docling provides two standard pipelines. The StandardPdfPipeline leverages several state-of-the-art AI models to
reconstruct a high-quality DoclingDocument representation
from PDF or image input, as described in section 4. The
SimplePipeline handles all markup-based formats (Office,
HTML, AsciiDoc) and may apply further enrichment models as well.
Pipelines can be fully customized by sub-classing from
an abstract base class or cloning the default model pipeline.
This effectively allows to fully customize the chain of models, add or replace models, and introduce additional pipeline
configuration parameters. To create and use a custom model
pipeline, you can provide a custom pipeline class as an argument to the main document conversion API.


4 PDF Conversion Pipeline
The capability to recover detailed structure and content from
PDF and image files is one of Docling’s defining features. In
this section, we outline the underlying methods and models
that drive the system.
Each document is first parsed by a PDF backend, which
retrieves the programmatic text tokens, consisting of string
content and its coordinates on the page, and also renders a
bitmap image of each page to support downstream operations. Any image format input is wrapped in a PDF container
on the fly, and proceeds through the pipeline as a scanned
PDF document. Then, the standard PDF pipeline applies a
sequence of AI models independently on every page of the
document to extract features and content, such as layout and
table structures. Finally, the results from all pages are aggregated and passed through a post-processing stage, which
eventually assembles the DoclingDocument representation.

4.1 AI Models

As part of Docling, we release two highly capable AI models to the open-source community, which have been developed and published recently by our team. The first model
is a layout analysis model, an accurate object detector for
page elements (Pfitzmann et al. 2022). The second model
is TableFormer (Nassar et al. 2022; Lysak et al. 2023), a
state-of-the-art table structure recognition model. We provide the pre-trained weights (hosted on Hugging Face) and
a separate Python package for the inference code (doclingibm-models).

Layout Analysis Model Our layout analysis model is
an object detector which predicts the bounding-boxes and
classes of various elements on the image of a given page. Its
architecture is derived from RT-DETR (Zhao et al. 2023) and
re-trained on DocLayNet (Pfitzmann et al. 2022), our popular human-annotated dataset for document-layout analysis,
among other proprietary datasets. For inference, our implementation relies on the Hugging Face transformers (Wolf
et al. 2020) library and the Safetensors file format. All predicted bounding-box proposals for document elements are
post-processed to remove overlapping proposals based on
confidence and size, and then intersected with the text tokens in the PDF to group them into meaningful and complete
units such as paragraphs, section titles, list items, captions,
figures, or tables.

Table Structure Recognition The TableFormer
model (Nassar et al. 2022), first published in 2022 and
since refined with a custom structure token language (Lysak
et al. 2023), is a vision-transformer model for table structure
recovery. It can predict the logical row and column structure
of a given table based on an input image, and determine
which table cells belong to column headers, row headers
or the table body. Compared to earlier approaches, TableFormer handles many characteristics of tables like partial
or no borderlines, empty cells, rows or columns, cell spans
and hierarchy on both column-heading and row-heading
level, tables with inconsistent indentation or alignment
and other complexities. For inference, our implementation
relies on PyTorch (Ansel et al. 2024). The PDF pipeline
feeds all table objects detected in the layout analysis to
the TableFormer model, by providing an image-crop of
the table and the included text cells. TableFormer structure
predictions are matched back to the PDF cells during a
post-processing step, to avoid expensive re-transcription of
the table image-crop, which also makes the TableFormer
model language agnostic.

OCR Docling utilizes OCR to convert scanned PDFs and
extract content from bitmaps images embedded in a page.
Currently, we provide integration with EasyOCR (eas 2024),
a popular third-party OCR library with support for many
languages, and Tesseract as a widely available alternative.
While EasyOCR delivers reasonable transcription quality,
we observe that it runs fairly slow on CPU (see section 5),
making it the biggest compute expense in the pipeline.

Assembly In the final pipeline stage, Docling assembles
all prediction results produced on each page into the DoclingDocument representation, as defined in the auxiliary
Python package docling-core. The generated document object is passed through a post-processing model which leverages several algorithms to augment features, such as correcting the reading order or matching figures with captions.